doc/whats_new/v0.21.rst, before:

.. include:: _contributors.rst

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

.. _changes_0_21:

Version 0.21.0
==============

**In development**

Changed models
--------------

The following estimators and functions, when fit with the same data and
parameters, may produce different models from the previous version. This often
occurs due to changes in the modelling logic (bug fixes or enhancements), or in
random sampling procedures.

- please add class and reason here (see version 0.20 what's new)

Details are listed in the changelog below.

(While we are trying to better inform users by providing this information, we
cannot assure that this list is complete.)

Changelog
---------

Support for Python 3.4 and below has been officially dropped.

..
    See version doc/whats_new/v0.20.rst for structure. Entries should be
    prefixed with one of the labels: |MajorFeature|, |Feature|, |Efficiency|,
    |Enhancement|, |Fix| or |API|. They should be under a heading for the
    relevant module (or *Multiple Modules* or *Miscellaneous*), and within each
    section should be ordered according to the label ordering above. Entries
    should end with: :issue:`123456` by :user:`Joe Bloggs <joeongithub>`.

- An entry goes here
- An entry goes here

:mod:`sklearn.cluster`
......................

- |MajorFeature| A new clustering algorithm: :class:`cluster.OPTICS`: an
  algoritm related to :class:`cluster.DBSCAN`, that has hyperparameters easier
  to set and that scales better, by :user:`Shane <espg>`,
  :user:`Adrin Jalali <adrinjalali>`, and :user:`Erich Schubert <kno10>`.

:mod:`sklearn.linear_model`
...........................

- |Fix| Fixed a bug in :class:`linear_model.MultiTaskElasticNet` and
  :class:`linear_model.MultiTaskLasso` which were breaking when
  ``warm_start = True``. :issue:`12360` by :user:`Aakanksha Joshi <joaak>`.

:mod:`sklearn.metrics`
......................

- |Feature| Added the :func:`metrics.max_error` metric and a corresponding
  ``'max_error'`` scorer for single output regression.
  :issue:`12232` by :user:`Krishna Sangeeth <whiletruelearn>`.

- |Feature| Add :func:`metrics.multilabel_confusion_matrix`, which calculates a
  confusion matrix with true positive, false positive, false negative and true
  negative counts for each class. This facilitates the calculation of set-wise
  metrics such as recall, specificity, fall out and miss rate.
  :issue:`11179` by :user:`Shangwu Yao <ShangwuYao>` and `Joel Nothman`_.

:mod:`sklearn.neighbors`
........................

- |API| Methods in :class:`neighbors.NearestNeighbors` :
  :func:`~neighbors.NearestNeighbors.kneighbors`,
  :func:`~neighbors.NearestNeighbors.radius_neighbors`,
  :func:`~neighbors.NearestNeighbors.kneighbors_graph`,
  :func:`~neighbors.NearestNeighbors.radius_neighbors_graph`
  now raise ``NotFittedError``, rather than AttributeError,
  when called before fit :issue:`12279` by :user:`Krishna Sangeeth
  <whiletruelearn>`.

:mod:`sklearn.pipeline`
.......................

- |API| :class:`pipeline.Pipeline` now supports using ``'passthrough'`` as a
  transformer. :issue:`11144` by :user:`Thomas Fan <thomasjpfan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.preprocessing`
............................

- |Efficiency| Make :class:`preprocessing.MultiLabelBinarizer` to cache class
  mappings instead of calculating it every time on the fly.
  :issue:`12116` by :user:`Ekaterina Krivich <kiote>` and `Joel Nothman`_.

- |Efficiency| :class:`preprocessing.PolynomialFeatures` now supports compressed
  sparse row (CSR) matrices as input for degrees 2 and 3. This is typically much
  faster than the dense case as it scales with matrix density and expansion degree
  (on the order of density^degree), and is much, much faster than the compressed
  sparse column (CSC) case. :issue:`12197` by :user:`Andrew Nystrom <awnystrom>`.

- |Efficiency| |API| Speed improvement in :class:`preprocessing.PolynomialFeatures`,
  in the dense case. Also added a new parameter ``order`` which controls output
  order for further speed performances. :issue:`12251` by `Tom Dupre la Tour`_.

:mod:`sklearn.tree`
...................
- Decision Trees can now be plotted with matplotlib using
  :func:`tree.plot_tree` without relying on the ``dot`` library,
  removing a hard-to-install dependency. :issue:`8508` by `Andreas Müller`_.

- |Feature| ``get_n_leaves()`` and ``get_depth()`` have been added to
  :class:`tree.BaseDecisionTree` and consequently all estimators based
  on it, including :class:`tree.DecisionTreeClassifier`,
  :class:`tree.DecisionTreeRegressor`, :class:`tree.ExtraTreeClassifier`,
  and :class:`tree.ExtraTreeRegressor`.
  :issue:`12300` by :user:`Adrin Jalali <adrinjalali>`.

Multiple modules
................

Changes to estimator checks
---------------------------

These changes mostly affect library developers.

- Add ``check_fit_idempotent`` to
  :func:`~utils.estimator_checks.check_estimator`, which checks that
  when `fit` is called twice with the same data, the ouput of
  `predict`, `predict_proba`, `transform`, and `decision_function` does not
  change. :issue:`12328` by :user:`Nicolas Hug <NicolasHug>`

Commit message:

ENH Prefer threads for IsolationForest (#12543)

doc/whats_new/v0.21.rst, after:

.. include:: _contributors.rst

.. currentmodule:: sklearn

.. _changes_0_21:

Version 0.21.0
==============

**In development**

Changed models
--------------

The following estimators and functions, when fit with the same data and
parameters, may produce different models from the previous version. This often
occurs due to changes in the modelling logic (bug fixes or enhancements), or in
random sampling procedures.

- please add class and reason here (see version 0.20 what's new)

Details are listed in the changelog below.

(While we are trying to better inform users by providing this information, we
cannot assure that this list is complete.)

Changelog
---------

Support for Python 3.4 and below has been officially dropped.

..
    See version doc/whats_new/v0.20.rst for structure. Entries should be
    prefixed with one of the labels: |MajorFeature|, |Feature|, |Efficiency|,
    |Enhancement|, |Fix| or |API|. They should be under a heading for the
    relevant module (or *Multiple Modules* or *Miscellaneous*), and within each
    section should be ordered according to the label ordering above. Entries
    should end with: :issue:`123456` by :user:`Joe Bloggs <joeongithub>`.

- An entry goes here
- An entry goes here

:mod:`sklearn.cluster`
......................

- |MajorFeature| A new clustering algorithm: :class:`cluster.OPTICS`: an
  algoritm related to :class:`cluster.DBSCAN`, that has hyperparameters easier
  to set and that scales better, by :user:`Shane <espg>`,
  :user:`Adrin Jalali <adrinjalali>`, and :user:`Erich Schubert <kno10>`.

:mod:`sklearn.linear_model`
...........................

- |Fix| Fixed a bug in :class:`linear_model.MultiTaskElasticNet` and
  :class:`linear_model.MultiTaskLasso` which were breaking when
  ``warm_start = True``. :issue:`12360` by :user:`Aakanksha Joshi <joaak>`.

:mod:`sklearn.ensemble`
.......................

- |Efficiency| Make :class:`ensemble.IsolationForest` prefer threads over
  processes when running with ``n_jobs > 1`` as the underlying decision tree
  fit calls do release the GIL. This changes reduces memory usage and
  communication overhead. :issue:`12543` by :user:`Isaac Storch <istorch>`
  and `Olivier Grisel`_.

:mod:`sklearn.metrics`
......................

- |Feature| Added the :func:`metrics.max_error` metric and a corresponding
  ``'max_error'`` scorer for single output regression.
  :issue:`12232` by :user:`Krishna Sangeeth <whiletruelearn>`.

- |Feature| Add :func:`metrics.multilabel_confusion_matrix`, which calculates a
  confusion matrix with true positive, false positive, false negative and true
  negative counts for each class. This facilitates the calculation of set-wise
  metrics such as recall, specificity, fall out and miss rate.
  :issue:`11179` by :user:`Shangwu Yao <ShangwuYao>` and `Joel Nothman`_.

:mod:`sklearn.neighbors`
........................

- |API| Methods in :class:`neighbors.NearestNeighbors` :
  :func:`~neighbors.NearestNeighbors.kneighbors`,
  :func:`~neighbors.NearestNeighbors.radius_neighbors`,
  :func:`~neighbors.NearestNeighbors.kneighbors_graph`,
  :func:`~neighbors.NearestNeighbors.radius_neighbors_graph`
  now raise ``NotFittedError``, rather than AttributeError,
  when called before fit :issue:`12279` by :user:`Krishna Sangeeth
  <whiletruelearn>`.

:mod:`sklearn.pipeline`
.......................

- |API| :class:`pipeline.Pipeline` now supports using ``'passthrough'`` as a
  transformer. :issue:`11144` by :user:`Thomas Fan <thomasjpfan>`.

:mod:`sklearn.preprocessing`
............................

- |Efficiency| Make :class:`preprocessing.MultiLabelBinarizer` to cache class
  mappings instead of calculating it every time on the fly.
  :issue:`12116` by :user:`Ekaterina Krivich <kiote>` and `Joel Nothman`_.

- |Efficiency| :class:`preprocessing.PolynomialFeatures` now supports compressed
  sparse row (CSR) matrices as input for degrees 2 and 3. This is typically much
  faster than the dense case as it scales with matrix density and expansion degree
  (on the order of density^degree), and is much, much faster than the compressed
  sparse column (CSC) case. :issue:`12197` by :user:`Andrew Nystrom <awnystrom>`.

- |Efficiency| |API| Speed improvement in :class:`preprocessing.PolynomialFeatures`,
  in the dense case. Also added a new parameter ``order`` which controls output
  order for further speed performances. :issue:`12251` by `Tom Dupre la Tour`_.

:mod:`sklearn.tree`
...................
- Decision Trees can now be plotted with matplotlib using
  :func:`tree.plot_tree` without relying on the ``dot`` library,
  removing a hard-to-install dependency. :issue:`8508` by `Andreas Müller`_.

- |Feature| ``get_n_leaves()`` and ``get_depth()`` have been added to
  :class:`tree.BaseDecisionTree` and consequently all estimators based
  on it, including :class:`tree.DecisionTreeClassifier`,
  :class:`tree.DecisionTreeRegressor`, :class:`tree.ExtraTreeClassifier`,
  and :class:`tree.ExtraTreeRegressor`.
  :issue:`12300` by :user:`Adrin Jalali <adrinjalali>`.

Multiple modules
................

Changes to estimator checks
---------------------------

These changes mostly affect library developers.

- Add ``check_fit_idempotent`` to
  :func:`~utils.estimator_checks.check_estimator`, which checks that
  when `fit` is called twice with the same data, the ouput of
  `predict`, `predict_proba`, `transform`, and `decision_function` does not
  change. :issue:`12328` by :user:`Nicolas Hug <NicolasHug>`
